# Abbot Ice Shelf Region

A Literature Review of Abbot, Venable, and Cosgrove Ice Shelves

The Abbot, Venable, and Cosgrove Ice Shelves are located along the continental shelf of the Bellingshausen Sea, located in West Antarctica. This continental shelf has been impacted by warm Circumpolar Deep Water, resulting in basal melting of the ice sheet cavities (Schubert et al., 2021). From 1975 to 2015, around 65% of the grounding line retreated along this region of West Antarctica, and areas of fast ice flow and thinning ice shelves exhibited accelerating retreat, based on Landsat satellite imagery (Christie et al., 2016). There are two prominent troughs in this region, the Belgica and Latady troughs (Ruan et al., 2021; Schubert et al., 2021). Warm Modified Circumpolar Deep Water flows along the east of the Belgica and Latady troughs toward the ice shelves (Schulze Chretien et al., 2021).

The Abbot Ice Shelf is close to having overall mass balance despite having a large volume of meltwater (Cochran et al., 2014). Abbot is a relatively thin ice shelf with no significant thinning observed from 2003 to 2008 (Pritchard et al., 2012). Cochran et al. (2014) conducted a gravity inversion of NASA Operation IceBridge airborne gravity data using Geosoft GMSys to obtain bathymetry beneath the Abbot Ice Shelf. However, the researchers mentioned that these gravity inversion methods have limitations such as failing to account for density variations in the ice and possible sediment presence. NASA Operation IceBridge (OIB) gravity data inversion revealed a continental rift on the Abbot Ice Shelf and south of the Cosgrove Ice Shelf, related to the rifting between Antarctica and Zealandia (Cochran et al., 2014). The north and south of the rift basin overlies a basin with stable, well-defined grounding lines (Cochran et al., 2014). These rifts of the Abbot Ice Shelf—along with thin sediment in shallow regions—allow warm seawater to circulate underneath the ice shelf, as Cohran et al. had found based on sub-ice water column depth data along NASA Operation IceBridge flight lines (2014).

As relatively thick ice shelves, Cosgrove and Venable exhibited thinning from 2003 to 2008, as researchers had found based on ICESat GLA12 Release-428 altimetry data (Pritchard et al., 2012). These ice shelves have relatively high sea-floor temperatures and deep bathymetric troughs that give warm waters access to the ice shelves (Pritchard et al., 2012). Peak meltwater values are found directly in front of the Venable Ice Shelf and can be traced back to the edge of the Belgica Trough (Schulze Chretien et al., 2021). The Venable Ice Shelf is pinned to a sub-ice topographic high, which could be threatened by further ice shelf thinning (Christie et al., 2016). NASA Operation IceBridge radar data indicate that the Venable Ice Shelf bed along the grounding line is relatively shallow (Christie et al., 2016).

### References
<div style="text-indent: -3em; padding-left: 3em;">
<p>Christie, F. D., Bingham, R. G., Gourmelen, N., Tett, S. F., & Muto, A. (2016). Four‐decade record of pervasive grounding line retreat along the Bellingshausen Margin of West Antarctica. Geophysical Research Letters, 43(11), 5741–5749. https://doi.org/10.1002/2016gl068972</p>
<p>Cochran, J. R., Jacobs, S. S., Tinto, K. J., and Bell, R. E. (2014). Bathymetric and oceanic controls on Abbot Ice Shelf thickness and stability, The Cryosphere, 8, 877–889, https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-8-877-2014</p>
<p>Pritchard, H. D., Ligtenberg, S. R., Fricker, H. A., Vaughan, D. G., van den Broeke, M. R., & Padman, L. (2012). Antarctic ice-sheet loss driven by basal melting of ice shelves. Nature, 484(7395), 502–505. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10968</p>
<p>Ruan, X., Speer, K. G., Thompson, A. F., Schulze Chretien, L. M., & Shoosmith, D. R. (2021). Ice‐shelf meltwater overturning in the Bellingshausen Sea. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 126(5). https://doi.org/10.1029/2020jc016957</p>
<p>Schubert, R., Thompson, A. F., Speer, K., Schulze Chretien, L., & Bebieva, Y. (2021). The Antarctic coastal current in the Bellingshausen Sea. The Cryosphere, 15(9), 4179–4199. https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-15-4179-2021</p>
<p>Schulze Chretien, L. M., Thompson, A. F., Flexas, M. M., Speer, K., Swaim, N., Oelerich, R., Ruan, X., Schubert, R., & LoBuglio, C. (2021). The shelf circulation of the Bellingshausen Sea. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 126(5). https://doi.org/10.1029/2020jc016871</p>
</div>